# Describe security password policies elements, such as management, complexity, and password alternatives (multi-factor authentication, certificates, and biometrics)
#CCNA #IT #CyberSecurity 

[Free CCNA | Security Fundamentals | Day 48 | CCNA 200-301 Complete Course](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VvFuieyTTSw&t=957s)


## Password complexity
Strong passwords should contain:
- at least 8 characters (preferably more)
- a mixture of uppercase and lowercase letters
- a mixture of letters and numbers
- one or more special characters (# @ ! ? etc.)
- + should be changed regularly

## Multi-factor authentication
Involves providing more than just a username/password to prove your identity. It usually involves providing two of the following:

- **Something you know:** a username/password combination, a PIN number, etc.
- **Something you have:** pressing a notification that appears on your phone, a badge that is scanned, etc.
- **Something you are**: biometrics such as a face scan, palm scan, fingerprint scan, retina scan, etc.

Requiring multiple factor of authentication greatly increases the security. Even if an attacker learns the target's password, they won't be able to login to the target's account.

## Digital certificates
Another form of authentication used to prove the identity of the holder of the certificate. They are used as a means for websites to prove their legitimacy. Entities that want a certificate to prove their identity send a CSR (Certificate Signing Request) to a CA (Certificate Authority), which will generate and sign the certificate.