# Differentiate authentication, authorisation, and accounting concepts
#CCNA #IT #CyberSecurity 

## The Three levels of Authentication (AAA)
- **Authentication** - the process of verifying the user's identity.
- **Authorization** - the process of verifying the level of access configured for a user.
- **Accounting** - the process of recording the use of resources.

It is a framework for controlling and monitor users of a network. Enterprises typically use a AAA server to provide AAA services. ISE (Identity Services Engine) is Cisco's AAA server.

AAA servers usually support these two AAA protocols:
- RADIUS: open standard protocol. Uses UDP ports 1812 and 1813.
- TACACS+: cisco proprietary protocol. Uses TCP port 49.

## Setting up AAA on a CISCO device
1. Enable AAA
	In global configuration mode:
```cisco
aaa new-model
```

2. Set TACACS+ as the protocol to use for AAA. Provide the ACS IP address
```cisco
(config)#tacacs-server host <IP address of ACS server>
```

3. Set a password to be used for encryption.
```cisco
tacacs-server key <password>
```

4. Create a default method list.
```cisco
aaa authentication login default group tacacs+ local
```
Lets break this command down:

`aaa authentication login`

Here we are telling the device we want to configure authentication for login attempts to the device. 

`default`
The "default" option means that this authentication method is going to be applied to all lines in the device. 

`group tacacs+ local` 
Defines what method is going to be used for authentication. In this case we are specifying that we want this device to authenticate with a TACACS+ server, which could be part of a 'group' or standalone, or use the 'local' username and password in the case when the ACS is not available in the network.

## Only allow ssh on the management interface
In global configuration mode:
```cisco
control-plane host
```

```cisco
(config-cp-host)#management-interface FastEthernet 2/0 allow ssh
```

Test basic AAA access
```cisco
(config-cp-host)#do test aaa group tacacs+ testadmin cisco legacy
```
