# Describe wireless principles
#CCNA #Networking #IT #WLAN 

[Jeremy's IT Lab](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zuYiktLqNYQ&list=PLxbwE86jKRgMpuZuLBivzlM8s2Dk5lXBQ&t=199)
[David Bombal - CCNA Course](https://courses.davidbombal.com/courses/267624/lectures)
## WiFi
- The term WiFi is a trademark of the WiFi Alliance, not directly connected to the IEEE.
- The Wifi Alliance tests and certifies equipment for 802.11 standards compliance interoperability with other devices.

### Considerations
1. All devices within range receive all frames, like devices connected to an Ethernet hub.
	1. Privacy of data within the LAN is a greater concern
	2. CSMA/CA (Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Avoidance) is used to facilitate half-duplex communications. When using CSMA/CA, a device will wait for other devices to stop transmitting before it transmits data itself
2. Wireless communications are regulated by various international and national bodies. Meaning that frequency ranges will vary slightly across different global regions
3. Wireless signal coverage area must be considered.
	1. Signal range.
	2. Signal absorption, reflection, refraction, diffraction, and scattering.

#### Absorption
Happens when a wireless signal passes through a material and is converted into heat, weakening the original signal.
#### Reflection
Happens when a signal bounces off of a material, for example metal.
#### Refraction
Happens when a wave is bent when entering a medium where the signal travels at a different speed.
#### Diffraction
Happens when a wave encounters an obstacle and travels around it. This can result in blind spots behind the obstacle.
#### Scattering
Happens when a material causes a signal to scatter in all directions.

4. Other devices using the same channels can cause interference. E.g. a wireless LAN in your neighbour's house/apartment.


## WiFi Standards
IEEE 802.11

| Wi-Fi Generation | Standard | Max Data Rate | Frequencies |
|---|---|---|---|
| | 802.11 | 2 Mbps | 2.4 GHz |
| | 802.11.b | 11 Mbps | 2.4 GHz |
| | 802.11.a | 54 Mbps | 5 GHz |
| | 802.11.g | 54 Mbps | 2.4 GHz |
| Wi-Fi 4 | 802.11.n | 600 Mbps | 2.4 / 5 GHz |
| Wi-Fi 5 | 802.11.ac | 6.93 Gbps| 5 GHz |
| Wi-Fi 6 | 802.11.ax | 4 x 802.11ac | 2.4 / 5 / 6 GHz |


# 1.11.a Non-overlapping  Wi-Fi channels
In larger WLANs with multiple APs, it's important that adjacent APs don't use overlapping channels. This helps avoid interference.

In the 2.4 GHz band, it is recommended to use channels 1, 6 and 11. Outside of North america you can use other channel combinations.

The 5 GHz band consists of non-overlapping channels, so it is much easier to avoid interference between adjacent APs.

# 1.11.b SSID
The SSID (Service Set Identifier) is a human-readable name which identifies the service set. All devices in a service set share the same SSID.

Service sets are groups of wireless devices. There are three main types:

## Independent 
An IBSS (Independent Basic Service Set) is a wireless network in which two or more wireless devices connect directly without using an AP (access Point). These are also called an **ad-hoc** network. Commonly used for file transfer (i.e. AirDrop). This type of service set are not scalable beyond a few devices. 
## Infrastructure
### BSS (Basic Service Set)
A BSS is a kind of Infrastructure Service Set in which clients connect to each other via an AP (Access Point), but not directly to each other.

A BSSID (Basic Service Set ID) is used to uniquely identify the AP. Other APs can use the same SSID, but not the same BSSID. The BSSID is the MAC address of the AP's radio.

Wireless devices request to associate with the BSS. Wireless devices that have associated with the BSS are called 'clients' or 'stations'. 

The area around the AP where its signal is usable is called a BSA (Basic Service Area), which is not to be confused with the BSS. BSS refers to the group of wireless devices connected to an AP whereas BSA refers to the physical area around the AP were devices can receive WiFi signal.

Clients must communicate via the AP, not directly with each other.

### ESS(Extended Service Set)
To create larger wireless LANs beyond the range of a single AP, we use an ESS.

APs with their own BSSs are connected by a wired network. Each BSS uses the same SSID. Each BSS has a unique BSSID. Each BSS uses a different channel to avoid interference.

Clients can pass between APs without having to reconnect, providing a seamless WiFi experience when moving between APs (this is called roaming).

The BSAs should overlap about 10 - 15%

## Mesh
### MBSS (Mesh Basic Service Set) 
Can be used in situations where it's difficult to run an Ethernet connection to every AP. Mesh APs use two radios: one to provide a BSS to wireless clients, and one to form a 'backhaul network' which is used to bridge traffic from AP to AP. At leat one AP is connected to the wired network, and it is called the RAP (Root Access Point). The other APs are called MAPs (Mesh Access Points).

A protocol is used to determine the best path through the mesh (similar to how dynamic routing protocols are used to determine the best path to a destination).

# 1.11.c RF
RF (Radio Frequency) are electromagnetic waves that carry information and are used for wireless communication.

The radio frequency range is from 300 Hz to 300 GHz and is used for many purposes. IEEE 802.11 uses a few sections of the UHF (Ultra High Frequency) and SHF (Super High Frequency) ranges.

WiFi uses two main bands (frequency ranges)
- **2.4 GHz** band (2.4 GHz to 2.4835 GHz)
- **5 GHz** band (5.150 GHz to 5.825 GHz)
	- Divided into four smaller bands: 
		5.150 GHz to 5.250 GHz
		5.250 GHz to 5.350 GHz
		5.470 GHz to 5.725 GHz
		5.725 GHz to 5.825 GHz

WiFi 6 (802.11ax) has expanded the spectrum range to include a band in the 6 GHz range.

Each band is divided up into multiple channels. Devices are configured to transmit and receive traffic on one or more of these channels. One important thing to consider is that these channels overlap.
# 1.11.d Encryption


# Distribution system
in 802.11, the upstream wired network is called the DS (Distribution System). Each wireless BSS or ESS is mapped to a VLAN in the wired network. It is possible for an AP to provide multiple LANs, each with a unique SSID. Each WLAN is mapped to a separate VLAN and connected to the wired network via a trunk. Each WLAN uses a unique BSSID, usually by incrementing the last digit of the BSSID by one.

# Additional AP Operational Modes
## Repeater mode
This mode ca be used to extend the range of a BSS. The repeater will simply retransmit any signal it receives from the AP. A repeater with a single radio must operate on the same channel as the AP, but this can drastically reduce the overall throughput on the channel. A repeater with two radios can receive on one channel, and then retransmit on another channel.

## Workgroup bridge (WGB)
A WGB operates as a wireless client of another AP, and can be use to connect wired devices to the wireless network.

## Outdoor bridge
An outdoor bridge can be used to connect networks over long distances without a physical cable connecting them. The APs will use specialised antennas that focus most of the signal power in one direction, which allows the wireless connection to be made over longer distances than normally possible. The connection can be point-to-point, or point-to-multipoint int which multiple sites connect to one central site.


