# Describe the need for and basic operations of Rapid PVST+ Spanning Tree Protocol and identify basic operations
#CCNA #CISCO #Networking #IT 

[Documentation](https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/td/docs/routers/access/3200/software/wireless/SpanningTree.html)
[Documentation](https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/tech/lan-switching/spanning-tree-protocol/index.html)
## Definitions

### Spanning Tree Protocol (STP)
Spanning Tree Protocol is a Layer 2 link management protocol that provides path redundancy while preventing loops in the network. STP defines a tree with a root device and a loop-free path from the root to all infrastructure devices in the Layer 2 network. STP forces redundant data paths into a standby (blocked) state. If a network segment in the spanning tree fails and a redundant path exists, the spanning-tree algorithm recalculates the spanning-tree topology and activates the standby path. 

### Rapid PVST+ 
Rapid PVST+ Spanning Tree Protocol is a version of the Spanning Tree Protocol (STP) that allows faster convergence and supports multiple VLANs. Rapid PVST+ is based on the IEEE 802.1w standard, Rapid Spanning Tree Protocol (RSTP), which improves the performance and efficiency of STP. Rapid PVST+ creates a separate spanning tree instance for each VLAN, which allows load balancing and fault isolation across different VLANs. Rapid PVST+ is the default STP mode on Cisco switches.

### BPDU (Bridge Protocol Data Unit)
A bridge protocol data unit (BPDU) is a type of data message that is used by switches to communicate information about the network topology and prevent loops. A BPDU contains information about ports, switches, port priority, and addresses.



## 2.5.a Root port, root bridge, (primary - secondary), and other port names
## 2.5.b Port states (forwarding - blocking)
## 2.5.c PortFast benefits

### Portfast
Spanning tree portfast is a feature that allows a switch port to skip the listening and learning states of the spanning tree protocol and go directly to the forwarding state. This reduces the time it takes for a port to become operational and allows devices connected to the port to communicate with the network faster. Spanning tree portfast should only be enabled on ports that are connected to a single host, such as a workstation or a server, to avoid creating network loops.

Here is how you enable `portfast` on an access port
```cisco
SW1>enable
SW1#configure terminal
SW1(config)#interface GigabitEthernet 0/2
SW1(config-if)#spanning-tree portfast
```

You can configure portfast globally. This will enable portfast in all access ports.
```cisco
SW1(config)spanning-tree portfast default
```

It is not advisable to enable portfast on trunk ports, but if you really want to do that .i.e. a trunk port that connects to a server. Then you can run the following command on the trunk interface.
```cisco
SW1(config)#interface GigabitEthernet 0/12
SW1(config-if)#spanning-tree portfast trunk
```

### BPDU Guard
Spanning tree BPDU Guard is a feature that protects the network from loops caused by unauthorized or misconfigured switches. It works by disabling any port that receives a BPDU message. BPDU Guard is usually enabled on ports that are connected to end devices, such as workstations or servers, and have the PortFast feature enabled. PortFast assumes that there are no other switches connected to the port, so if a BPDU is received, it means that there is a potential loop in the network. BPDU Guard prevents this loop by shutting down the port and putting it in an error-disabled state. The port can be manually re-enabled or automatically recovered after a specified time interval. 

Enabling BPDU guard on an access port that have been configured with portfast.
```cisco
SW1(config)#interface GigabitEthernet 0/2
SW1(config-if)#spanning-tree portfast
SW1(config-if)#spanning-tree bpduguard enable
```

This feature can also be enabled globally:
```cisco
SW1(config-if)#spanning-tree portfast bpduguard default
```

### Root Guard
Spanning tree root guard is a feature that prevents another switch from becoming the root bridge in a spanning tree network. It is used to enforce the topology of the network and protect the root bridge from unauthorized or misconfigured switches. It works by blocking (moving the interface to a root-inconsistent STP state) any port that receives a superior BPDU. By blocking the port, spanning tree root guard prevents a loop or a topology change in the network. Spanning tree root guard is configured on the ports that are connected to the downstream switches from the root bridge.

Configuring Root guard on Catalyst 6500/6000 and Catalyst 4500/4000:
```cisco
SW1#configure terminal
SW1(config)#interface GigabitEthernet 0/12
SW1(config-if)#spanning-tree guard root
```

Configuring Root guard on Catalyst 2900XL, 3500XL, 2950, and 3550:
```cisco
SW1#configure terminal
SW1(config)#interface GigabitEthernet 0/12
SW1(config-if)#spanning-tree rootguard
```


| Industry standards | Cisco versions |
|---|---|
| **Spanning Tree Protocol (IEEE 802.D)**<br> The original STP <br> All VLANs Share on STP instance<br> Therefore, cannot load balance | **Per-VLAN Spanning Tree Plus (PVST+)**<br> Cisco's upgrade to 802.1D<br> Each VLAN has its own STP instance<br> Can load balance by blocking different ports in each VLAN |
| **Rapid Spanning Tree Protocol (IEEE 802.1w)** <br> Much Faster at converging/adapting to network changes than 802.1D<br> All VLANs share one STP instance<br> Therefore, cannot load balance | **Rapid Per-VLAN Spanning Tree Plus (Rapid PVST+)**<br> Cisco's upgrade to 802.1w<br> Each VLAN has its own STP instance<br> Can load balance by blocking different ports in each VLAN |
| **Multiple Spanning Tree Protocol (802.1s)**<br> Uses modified RSTP mechanics<br> Can group multiple VLANs into different instances to perform load balancing (ie. VLANs 1-5 in instance 1, VLANs 6-10 in ) | |


Multiple Spanning Tree Protocol (802.1s) for Large networks with a great number of VLANs
Rapid PVST+ for smaller networks with less VLANs